blog: add blog post about recently added graphiql-explorer (#14393)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/blog/2019-05-29-intergrating-graphiql-explorer/index.md

---
title: Improvements to GraphiQL IDE - adding GraphiQL Explorer
date: 2019-05-29
author: Michal Piechowiak
tags:
  - graphql

>   - graphiql-explorer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - graphiql-explorer
```

Author: seems like prettier demands 2 spaces

Reviewer: Something's awry here, then! I'm not even 100% sure that's valid.

Author: This follows tags as set in https://raw.githubusercontent.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/master/docs/blog/2019-05-17-improvements-to-schema-customization/index.md which also use 2 spaces

Reviewer: @pieh the tags were showing as indented weirdly--you're right!

![Screen Shot 2019-05-29 at 12 25 01 PM](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/3924690/58577771-d669ff00-820c-11e9-81e9-a993178cd9b4.png)

>   - developer experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - developer experience
```

---

> Gatsby's data layer is powered by [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/). This means that if you are building a Gatsby site, you will almost certainly use GraphQL to take advantage of Gatsby's rich plugin ecosystem that extends this schema with data from _anywhere_. A popular tool for exploring your GraphQL schema is [GraphiQL](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql) — which is a graphical interactive in-browser GraphQL development environment. It serves as an interactive playground where you can compose, test, and see the live results of your queries. If you haven't seen or used GraphiQL, it looks something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gatsby's data layer is powered by [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/). This means that if you are building a Gatsby site, you will almost certainly use GraphQL to take advantage of Gatsby's rich plugin ecosystem that extends this schema with data from _anywhere_. A popular tool for exploring your GraphQL schema is [GraphiQL](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql) — which is a graphical, interactive, in-browser GraphQL development environment. It serves as an interactive playground where you can compose, test, and see the live results of your queries. If you haven't seen or used GraphiQL, it looks something like this:
```

Reviewer 2: This doesn't show very well — I added commas to the "graphical, interactive, in-browser" part.

> <video controls="controls" autoplay="true" loop="true">

Reviewer 3: Do these videos have to autoplay? It would be nice to let users decide with the controls, in case motion makes them sick.

Author: I copied markup from one of previous posts without much thought - I will remove autoplay

Author: dropped autoplay and loop in recent commit

> <video controls="controls" autoplay="true" loop="true">

Reviewer 3: I'm also wondering if we could wrap these in a bit more markup and add some text alternatives:

```suggestion
<figure>
    <video controls="controls" autoplay="false" loop="true">
        <source />
        <p />
    </video>
    <figcaption>some kind of caption here</figcaption>
</figure>
```

Author: wrapped videos in figure + figcaption

  <source type="video/mp4" src="/graphiql-explore.mp4"></source>
  <p>Your browser does not support the video element.</p>
</video>

## What is GraphiQL Explorer?

> [`graphiql-explorer`](https://github.com/OneGraph/graphiql-explorer) is a plugin for GraphiQL that adds a new technique to explore and build GraphQL queries. It adds a graphical representation of available fields and inputs that can be used in queries. It also allows constructing full queries by clicking through available fields and inputs without the repetitive process of typing these queries out by hand!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`graphiql-explorer`](https://github.com/OneGraph/graphiql-explorer) is a plugin for GraphiQL built by the team at [OneGraph](https://www.onegraph.com/) that adds a new technique to explore and build GraphQL queries. It adds a graphical representation of available fields and inputs that can be used in queries. It also allows constructing full queries by clicking through available fields and inputs without the repetitive process of typing these queries out by hand!
```

> [`graphiql-explorer`](https://github.com/OneGraph/graphiql-explorer) is a plugin for GraphiQL built by the team at [OneGraph](https://www.onegraph.com/) that adds a new technique to explore and build GraphQL queries. It adds a graphical representation of available fields and inputs that can be used in queries. It also allows constructing full queries by clicking through available fields and inputs without the repetitive process of typing these queries out by hand!

Author: How about?
```suggestion
[`graphiql-explorer`](https://github.com/OneGraph/graphiql-explorer) is a plugin for GraphiQL that adds a new technique to explore and build GraphQL queries. It adds a graphical representation of available fields and inputs that can be used in queries. It also allows constructing full queries by clicking through available fields and inputs without the repetitive process of typing these queries out by hand!

GraphiQL Explorer was built by the team at [OneGraph](https://www.onegraph.com/) (OneGraph is a single GraphQL endpoint through which you can bring in data from dozens of services like Salesforce, Stripe, Spotify, GitHub, and more). Check ["Build a Podcast Mashup App Using OneGraph and Gatsby — Learn With Jason" recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=10jeoEWy-8g&list=PLz8Iz-Fnk_eTpvd49Sa77NiF8Uqq5Iykx&index=25&t=0s) to learn more about OneGraph and how to use it with Gatsby.
```

## Why is GraphiQL Explorer?

> We often hear that many developer's first usage of GraphQL is through Gatsby. GraphQL, like any technology, has a learning curve. We can't eliminate this learning curve completely but we can try to make it smoother. As mentioned previously, GraphiQL Explorer allow users to build full GraphQL queries without typing a single line of code. This enables users that don't yet fully understand the GraphQL query syntax to _learn_ GraphQL much more easily:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We often hear that many developers' first usage of GraphQL is through Gatsby. GraphQL, like any technology, has a learning curve. We can't eliminate this learning curve completely but we can try to make it smoother. As mentioned previously, GraphiQL Explorer allows users to build full GraphQL queries without typing a single line of code. This enables users that don't yet fully understand the GraphQL query syntax to _learn_ GraphQL much more easily:
```

<video controls="controls" autoplay="true" loop="true">
  <source type="video/mp4" src="./graphiql-explorer-demo.mp4"></source>
  <p>Your browser does not support the video element.</p>
</video>

> For more information, check out ["How OneGraph onboards users who are new to GraphQL"](https://www.onegraph.com/blog/2019/01/24/How_OneGraph_onboards_users_new_to_GraphQL.html) blog post for more details.

Author: I think I went on committing suggestion spree here. 
> For more information, check out [...] for more details

> For more information, check out ["How OneGraph onboards users who are new to GraphQL"](https://www.onegraph.com/blog/2019/01/24/How_OneGraph_onboards_users_new_to_GraphQL.html) blog post for more details about it from [OneGraph](https://www.onegraph.com/) (creators of GraphiQL Explorer).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, check out ["How OneGraph onboards users who are new to GraphQL"](https://www.onegraph.com/blog/2019/01/24/How_OneGraph_onboards_users_new_to_GraphQL.html) blog post for more details.
```

## Advanced usecases

> Improvements to onboarding users new to GraphQL isn't only goal of integrating GraphiQL Explorer into Gatsby. There are other pain points that are getting addressed with this addition. Example of this would be [union types and inline fragments](https://graphql.org/learn/queries/#inline-fragments). If user is not aware of syntax used to query this type of fields it can be pretty frustrating experience. Explorer helps here too by listing available types in union:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Improvements to on-boarding users new to GraphQL isn't the only goal of integrating GraphiQL Explorer into Gatsby. There are other pain points that are getting addressed with this addition. Specifically [union types and inline fragments](https://graphql.org/learn/queries/#inline-fragments). If the user is not aware of this syntax to query this type of fields it can be a fairly frustrating experience! GraphiQL Explorer helps solve this problem by listing available types in union:
```

> Improvements to on-boarding users new to GraphQL isn't the only goal of integrating GraphiQL Explorer into Gatsby. There are other pain points that are getting addressed with this addition. Specifically [union types and inline fragments](https://graphql.org/learn/queries/#inline-fragments). If the user is not aware of this syntax to query this type of fields it can be a fairly frustrating experience! GraphiQL Explorer helps solve this problem by listing available types in union:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Improvements to on-boarding users new to GraphQL isn't the only goal of integrating GraphiQL Explorer into Gatsby. There are other pain points that are getting addressed with this addition. Specifically [union types and inline fragments](https://graphql.org/learn/queries/#inline-fragments). If the user is not aware of this syntax to query this type of fields it can be a fairly frustrating experience! GraphiQL Explorer helps solve this problem by listing available union types:
```

<video controls="controls" autoplay="true" loop="true">
  <source type="video/mp4" src="./graphiql-explorer-union-demo.mp4"></source>
  <p>Your browser does not support the video element.</p>
</video>

## Try it now

> We recently [added](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/14280) GraphiQL Explorer to Gatsby. It's available in `gatsby@2.7.3` and newer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recently [added](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/14280) GraphiQL Explorer to Gatsby. It's available in starting with `gatsby@2.7.3`.
```

> We recently [added](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/14280) GraphiQL Explorer to Gatsby. It's available in starting with `gatsby@2.7.3`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We recently [added](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/14280) GraphiQL Explorer to Gatsby. It's available starting with `gatsby@2.7.3`.
```

Create new Gatsby project:

```shell
gatsby new gatsby-with-explorer
```

or update Gatsby in your existing project:

```shell

> npm install gatsby

Reviewer 2: Should this include `@latest` or `@^2.7.3`?

Author: this is equivalent to `gatsby@latest`, it will update to latest version

```

or try it [live](https://gatsby-1774317511.gtsb.io/___graphql?explorerIsOpen=true).

## Future work

> There is opportunity for further improvements for Gatsby users. One that we will be tackling next is [support for using GraphQL fragments provided by Gatsby plugins](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/14371).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are opportunities for further improvements for Gatsby users. One that we will be tackling next is [support for using GraphQL fragments provided by Gatsby plugins](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/issues/14371).
```
One other opportunity I'd love to mention is evaluating / improving accessibility of the GraphiQL interface. I haven't gotten a chance to review it really...I could perhaps file an issue to see if anyone wants to take it on?

Author: I didn't notice mention about accessibility before. 

I think this is great idea but not sure where the issue should live - we are "just" integrating `graphiql` and `graphiql-explorer` in our code ( https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/blob/master/packages/gatsby-graphiql-explorer/src/app/app.js#L272-L316 ) so evaluating issue/ticket might be filed here, but actual changes (if any required) will need to be done mostly upstream:
 - [`graphiql` repo](https://github.com/graphql/graphiql)
 - [`graphiql-explorer` repo](https://github.com/OneGraph/graphiql-explorer)

Author: I was doing quick keyboard navigation check and it doesn't seem great. 

I also found couple of issues already reported in some graphiql related repositories:
 - https://github.com/graphql/graphiql/issues/327
 - https://github.com/codemirror/CodeMirror/issues/4604
